Learnings From 1-ish Year (truly) Training Neural Networks


Context - I've been working on robot learning at Lute https://www.lute.one/ for ~9 months now. This post is titled "Learnings From 1 Year (truly) Training Neural Networks" not because I trained my first neural net a year ago, but because I feel like I hit an inflection point in my rate of learning. The motivation for this post is simply to reflect on these learnings and how my thinking around the process of training neural networks has changed since then. Note, this is focused on training neural networks for robot manipulation specifically.
And as motivation, here are a couple of policies we trained to 95+% success rate running for hours :P

ML is hard because there are many places things can go wrong, the feedback cycle is slow, and evaluation metrics are often noisy. In robotics you have to layer on top of that: the real world is not reproducible and you have the full hardware stack you must deal with. In the following points I've tried to compress the things that I try to keep in mind.

I. Data is king
At the end of the day the model will learn from the data that is provided to it. Obvious, I know, and I've heard this emphasised many times. But it really is true that you can't just throw "okay" data at a model and expect it to be good. It requires a special type of patience to sit with a teleoperator and collect DAgger data to patch up failure mode after failure mode.

II. Picking the right experiment to run is key
Compute is expensive. Models take long to train. The space of things to try is enormous. Each experiment builds on the previous one, and ideally the metrics gradually improve with each experiment. Picking the wrong experiment with no clear hypothesis can waste days and kill momentum.
Given this, I find good documentation of experiments extremely useful. If not done, I find it easy to forget what the hypothesis of the experiment even was by the time the results come back. Once I do a few experiments, I can't emphasize enough how much laying out the experiment log in a thoughtful way helps for making conclusions and deciding next steps.
It's important to isolate parameters by how much effect they had on the result. In practice this is hard and often noisy. For example, maybe I change my model architecture and want to ablate if this improves my policy performance on the same data. Well now the batch size has to change to fit into VRAM, the inference stack was built for the baseline, eval results change throughout the day because of lighting, etc, etc, etc. All of these have good solutions but it requires building up a lot of intuition to extract useful signal in minimal time.
Balancing all of this is tricky because of limited compute since compute creates a hard limit on the number of experiments that can be run per unit time. This is where good ML intuition makes such a big difference. If person A's intuition tells them changing parameter X will have no impact on the result, but person B needs to run a 2 day job on a B200 node to find out, then person A saved $1,532.16 (https://docs.nebius.com/compute/resources/pricing) plus 2 days of iteration time. Also, sidenote, considering the capex on GPUs is $100s of billions, it's no surprise that top ML people are paid so much to make better use of these resources.

III. ML is a full stack problem
Most of the battle is engineering. This is especially true in robotics. There is so much infrastructure needed before a model is even trained. And good infrastructure allows many experiments to be run. Moreover, good engineering is often necessary to make the model even work to begin with. Quick anecdote - recently we tried a precise manipulation task of inserting a wire into a narrow tube. Initially, during evaluation, the arms would hang there just before the insertion was supposed to happen. I was banging my head trying to understand what was wrong with the data or model. Turns out the model wasn't being compiled and inference speed was sluggish. Upon fixing this the model success rate jumped from ~0 to ~1/2 without any further changes. Perhaps it is obvious to some that this is important, and I thought so too, but it was surprising to me that it was _that_ important.

IV. Results-driven, not idea-driven
I used to think "this idea is so good, it _has_ to work", and proceed to bang my head against a wall making no progress. Instead, I've found being indifferent about any given idea, and (to paraphrase Elon) being maximally truth-seeking is the way to go. Instead of trying to force something to work, I try to frame it as understanding _if_ it will work. I find this to be consistent with being stubborn on the over-arching goal, but flexible on the path to get there.

V. Building up a good codebase makes all the difference
I've learnt to be neurotic about every single line of code, _especially_ in the age of agentic programming. There's nothing worse than realizing a training run was wasted because of a silly bug.
Things I like in a training codebase-
- Everything tunable is exposed in the config and glancing at a config gives you full information on a training run.
- The env is reproducible and training can be run with minimal commands on a new machine.
- Correctness is enforced with descriptive errors.
- Dataloading is optimized and configs are tuned for maximum GPU utilization.

VI. Evaluation is hard (in robotics)
Performance fluctuates with lighting, the real world is generally not reproducible. Success rate measurements generally have low confidence so you need many rollouts for statistical significance. But without proper evaluations, you have no way to get the right signal on which approach is working. Hence it is a necessary pain.

Looking Ahead

ML skills that I admire and want to get good at-
- Scaling laws. There's something beautiful about them. Neural networks can feel like magical black boxes. Experiments are expensive to run, take long to train, it is hard to evaluate results, there are infinite combinations of experiments you could run. But the fact that beneath all this there is such a simple rule: more compute, more data, and more model capacity tend to produce better results, and this has shown to scale to many orders of magnitude and application domains. I admire people who truly "feel" this. I notice some people (who are better at ML than me) have a "feeling" when they have the right recipe that can be scaled, and can often arrive at the right recipe with relatively little experimentation. Good on them.
